[TRIBAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is the biggest
rock in the world.
It was modeled out of
mud by two small boys who
were playing after rainfall.
It was in the Dreamtime.
Is how the Aborigines
explain the presence
of this enormous massive
sandstone in the middle
of the Australian desert.
>> Its original name is Uluru,
but it's more often known
as Ayers Rock.
Ayers Rock is three and 1/2
kilometers long by two and 1/2
wide.
It looms 350 meters
above the plain.
>> For 600 million years, its
old carcass has been attacked
by the sun, the
rain, and the wind.
But we can also
see on its slopes
the traces left
behind by the battles
between two mythical
heroes, the snake spirits.
>> To the west of the monolith
rise the 36 domes of the Olga
Mountains.
For the Anangu people,
this is Kata Tjuta,
which literally means,
many heads, a reference
to the shape of the rocks.
[TRIBAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Anangus have been living
in this region for at least
20,000 years.
For them, Uluru and Kata
Tjuta are sacred places.
The two sides have the
same spiritual importance
for the Aborigines.
But the rocks of Kata
Tjuta are the most secret.
The myths and beliefs
linked to them
are only for the initiated.
>> Less than 300 kilometers away
to the east stands a monolith
50 meters high.
It's called Chambers Pillar.
Like Ayers Rock and
the Olga Mountains,
it's a block of sandstone.
Its spectacular mass was
uncovered by erosion.
>> Chambers Pillar was only
discovered by explorers
in 1860.
It became a landmark.
But the Aborigines
had always known it.
For them, it is a sacred rock.
They see in it the petrified
form of Itirkawara.
>> Itirkawara is a character
from their founding myth,
a gecko who turned
himself into a giant.
In the Dreamtime, he is supposed
to have fallen asleep here
and turned into a rock.
>> If you go 500
kilometers north of here,
you will find another
natural curiosity.
[DIDGERIDOO BLOWING]
Huge spherical rocks
made of red granite.
These are the Devils Marbles.
>> For scientists, these rocks
were formed by the compression
of lava within
the Earth's crust.
For the Aborigines, these
balls were left there
by the Rainbow Snake.
Once again, this was
in the Dreamtime.
>> The Dreamtime is the basic
concept of Aboriginal belief.
We can see it illustrated in
these petroglyphs in N'Dhala
Gorge.
It was the earliest
time, an imaginary time
when spirits roamed the land.
They created landscapes,
men, animals, forests, lakes.
But at the same time they
created the language,
the rules, and the
laws of their tribe.
>> For the Aborigines,
all this is one--
the trees, the rocks,
the birds, the men,
are the inseparable
components of one creation.
>> This global fashion of
perceiving the world is without
doubt the most ancient spiritual
way that man has explored.
It persists where nature's
influence weighs most heavily
in everyday life, where a man
feels intimately bound to it.
This fosters a mixture
of magic and religion
known as shamanism, still very
much alive among the Mongols.
>> The daily concern of
these nomadic tribes is
the well-being of their herds.
They raise long
legs and short legs.
The short legs are the cows
and ewes because they never
wander far away.
The long legs are the horses who
often stray far from the camp.
[ORIENTAL MUSIC PLAYING]
[SPEAKING MONGOLIAN]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> Life goes on governed by
the vagaries of the wind,
the presence of wolves, and
the height of the grass under
a vivid blue sky.
The Mongols have always
looked on the sky
as their common room.
They have made it their god.
They call it the Tengri,
and it's the oldest wood
in their language.
>> For a long time, the Mongols
had only the sky for a god.
[HORSE SNORTING]
[SPEAKING MONGOLIAN]
And then in the 16th century,
Buddhism came to these plains.
The first temples were
built, and notably the temple
of Erdene Zuu.
It's situated very near a
Karakorum, the ancient Mongol
capital created by Genghis Khan.
Completely ringed by
a brick wall, topped
by more than 100 stupors,
this is the most ancient
and the biggest
temple in the country.
>> Buddhism finally spread
to the whole of Mongolia.
At the beginning of
the 20th century,
the country had more
than 700 monasteries.
But most of them were destroyed
during the Cultural Revolution
of 1937, when 20,000
lamas were put to death.
The Mongols have regained their
freedom of worship since 1990.
Their religion, which is
inspired by Tibetan Buddhism,
is very strong.
But it has not
displaced shamanism.
>> This statue is one of the
last vestiges of the ancient
Mongol capital.
There were four like this
at each corner of the town.
The tortoise, linked with
the spirit of the waters,
was supposed to protect
Karakorum from floods.
[SPEAKING MONGOLIAN]
Today, people still
come to pray to him.
They lay stones and
they make offerings.
>> In fact, the Mongols have
never given up shamanism.
They've integrated it into
their own form of Buddhism.
They still believe in the
spirits of the landscape.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In one year, a Mongol
moves on six or seven times,
depending on the
season, the vegetation,
and the needs of his animals.
But each time, when
he puts up his yurt,
he pays strict attention
to its correct orientation.
>> The door is
always facing south.
Inside the tent, too, everything
is always in the same place.
The men sit on the west
side, the women on the east.
The north-facing side
of the yurt is sacred.
The family's most valuable
possessions are kept there.
[ORIENTAL MUSIC PLAYING]
Only the most respected people
are allowed to go in there.
>> It's also in the northern
part that the Mongols raised
the small altar, which
is found in every yurt.
With its butter lamps and
its photo of the Dalai Lama.
>> This small ceremony bears
witness again to the importance
Mongols give to the
cardinal points.
When horsemen leave the
camp, the four directions
are blessed each in
turn with mare's milk.
This is a sure way not to
forget the superior powers.
[ORIENTAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Man has always needed to
localize the invisible world,
to situate in relation to his
own universe, his own horizons.
He has often taken the cardinal
points into consideration
when building his holy places
or practicing his rituals.
>> On the Mayan site of
Chichen Itza in Mexico,
the main pyramid, El Castillo,
was very precisely orientated
when it was built in the
middle of the Grand Esplanade.
The Mayas saw the Earth
as a flat, square shape,
with each corner at
a cardinal point.
To be in harmony with the
Earth, the four staircases
of the pyramid are facing
the four cardinal points.
>> A few dozen meters from
El Castillo, to the west,
there's a construction
open to the sky.
This is an area where they
played the game of pelota.
Two high walls face
each other, each one
has a stone ring set in it.
The game of pelota
was a team game.
The players had to get
a heavy rubber ball
from one side to the other.
And if possible, get it to go
through one of the rings fixed
eight meters above the ground.
>> The game was difficult.
The stakes, terrifying.
The loser was quite
simply beheaded.
As we can see in this scene,
which is carved into the wall,
the captain of the
winning team is
holding a flint knife in one
hand, and in the other hand
the head of the loser.
The head was probably
then displayed nearby
on this platform whose design
suggests its sinister use.
>> Experts in Mayan culture
think that this ball game was
not so much a sport but more
of a ritual with a cosmic
dimension.
The ball went
backwards and forwards.
This was probably an
evocation of the movements
of the planets and the sun.
>> The Mayans were fascinated
by the heavenly bodies.
At Chichen Itza, this
small circular building
was probably for
observing the stars.
The narrow openings
in the walls are
aligned so that they
correspond to the positions
of the moon and certain
planets on key days
of the Mayan calendar.
>> Man has often considered
the position and the movement
of the stars and the universe
as the supreme expression
of divine order.
And he has tried to
decipher the principles
and workings of an
infinitely complex creation.
>> There is in fact only one
astral cycle that everyone can
understand and relate
to, that of the sun.
It rises, it sets.
It is the absolute master of
the rhythms of life on Earth.
This is the proof
of its great power.
In many civilizations,
it is considered
as the primordial deity.
>> Indians, Hindus, Incas,
and Aztecs have all worshipped
the sun.
But it is without
doubt in Egypt that it
has been venerated longest.
The tombs, the stelas,
and the monuments
that have lasted until
today are full of references
to the solar occult.
>> The pyramids pointing towards
the sky symbolize the ladder
by which man can reach the sun.
They house the tomb
of the pharaoh,
who was considered as the
earthly incarnation of the sun.
It is represented here
in the guise of Amon Ra.
>> Throughout the
many dynasties,
the Egyptians have represented
the sun god under many forms.
On this stela, the
divinity has a human body,
the head of a falcon,
and a headdress
in the form of a solar disk.
This is Ra-Horakhty.
>> When the sun set, the
Egyptians said it was
descending into the underworld.
That it was leaving on its
boat to confront Apophis,
the great snake who wanted
to prevent the return of day.
Mythologies and religions
are almost universally
in accordance
concerning the partition
of the tangible universe.
There are two worlds--
the celestial world
associated with light,
and the underworld
associated with darkness.
And each world has its
own gods and demons.
>> Caves and openings in the
rock very probably figured
in the origins of entry points
into the world of shadows.
But at the same time,
they served as shelters
against the cold
and wild animals.
Thence came the confusing idea
that within these cavities
the Earth was offering land
the warmth and protection
of the maternal womb.
>> So the Earth was
the mother of humanity.
And this idea gave rise to cults
devoted to mother goddesses,
incarnating both the Earth and
fertility at the same time.
This ivory statue was discovered
in France in the Haute-Garonne
Department.
It's about 23,000 years old.
It's the Venus of Lespugue.
It's thought to be
a representation
of a primitive idol.
[CHANTING]
>> This small
stature has no feet,
and its legs are tapered
towards the bottom.
This was perhaps so
that the statue could
be planted into the
earth, thus creating
a magic link between the
fecundity it represented
and the fertility of the ground.
[WATER RUNNING]
>> Caves, fissures-- these
have fired the imaginations
of communities who have often
associated them with female
organs.
And they bring forth from the
bowels of the Earth heroes
and gods.
[WATER RUNNING]
If we believe the
legend that the god Zeus
himself was born
in this cave, which
opens onto the slopes of
Mount Dikteon in Crete.
Zeus then went to Mount Olympus,
the highest mountain in Greece,
where, according to legend,
the gods of the Greek pantheon
lived.
>> Less than 100 kilometers
away from Zeus' residence,
this incredible chaos of
rocks has taken on a sacred
dimension.
This mass of rocky spires is
situated in central Greece
on the Plain of Thessaly.
This is the site of Meteora--
Meteora meaning literally
hanging in the air.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We find that men settled
at the top of these cliffs,
some of which are
400 meters high.
There they built monasteries.
These buildings date from
the 14th and 15th centuries.
Byzantine monks had settled
there 300 years earlier.
They then lived in caves, which
can be seen all over this rock
face.
And one day, they decided to
leave these unsafe shelters.
And after many
great efforts, they
settled at the top of
these steepling outcrops.
[RELIGIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
[BELL RINGING]
>> We might think that it was
their desire to get closer
to God which led
them to do this.
The truth is more prosaic.
It was to escape persecution
by the Turks and Albanians.
[RELIGIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
In those times, they can
only reach these refuges
by using long, movable
ladders, or being hoisted up
by a rope and winch.
>> The monks built more
than 20 monasteries.
Many were destroyed during
the Second World War
because they were used
by the Greek resistance.
Five of them are still occupied.
The ancients called them
monasteries of the air.
They said that the rocks had
been specially sent by heaven
to provide the monks with a
refuge from whence prayers
would easily rise up to God.
>> The idea that the higher
one can get the closer one is
to God, is ancient
and universal.
In the Bible, it's the
story of the Tower of Babel.
[MIDDLE EASTERN MUSIC PLAYING]
This tale no doubt
takes its inspiration
from the huge high rise
constructions in Mesopotamia,
which were called ziggurats.
>> In fact, it denounces
human ambition.
Man, having acquired the
technique of construction,
was thought to have become
very sure of himself
and wanted to reach heaven,
which is good as man
taking the place of God.
By their very
nature, deities must
live in the place which is
difficult for man to reach,
like for example
the mountain, which
is considered by
various civilizations
as the domain of the gods.
>> Sacred mountains
are found everywhere,
even if they're not
worshipped for themselves,
even if they are not the
home of gods or spirits.
Such height so connected with
an idea of spiritual elevation.
>> They take man away from the
earthbound nature of his daily
life.
They are the symbol
of higher ambition.
Mountains are often volcanoes,
so their spiritual import
is even stronger.
The legend author Virgil claims
that the forge of Vulcan,
the god of fire, was
located here in Sicily.
Etna, he said, was
Vulcan's workshop,
which is why we
see these plumes,
this activity on the surface.
[VOLCANO ERUPTING]
>> Tradition has it that
Vulcan was the son of Jupiter.
The cyclops helped
him in his work.
He mastered molten
magic, and with it
made jewels and weapons.
It is said that he forged the
shield of the hero Achilles.
When lava starts to well up
from the bowels of the Earth,
Virgil is persuaded that this is
the blood of giants vanquished
by the gods.
>> The ancient Greeks
had another version.
They say that if the Earth
spews out lava and smoke here,
it's because Typhon,
the 100-headed monster,
is raging against the
gods who chained him up
in the depths of Etna.
The houses of gods
or of monsters,
volcanoes inspire in the
imagination of all the power
of earthly energy.
>> An eruption is often
perceived as anger,
the tangible proof of the
vexation of superior powers.
It is written in the
Bible the eternal
rained fire and brimstone
down on Sodom and Gomorrah.
>> Once the Earth is healed,
there remain fractured
landscapes.
Solidified lava,
rocks that once again
stimulate the imagination.
Here on these shores
in Northern Ireland,
great volcanic activity
occurred 50 million years ago.
[SEABIRDS CRYING]
>> At the foot of these cliffs,
the molten matter as it set
formed thousands
of basalt columns.
>> The polygonal shapes of these
blocks of rock are so perfect
that for a long time it was
thought that they had been
shaped from raw matter.
There are so many of
them, more than 40,000.
But they are
believed to have been
cut by giants who built here the
incredible stone causeway which
led out into the sea, forming
a bridge with Scotland.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
That's the story
that Gaelic legend
tells about the
Giant's Causeway that
lies at the foot of
the Antrim plateau.
>> When rocks are shaped
like this on a huge scale,
man tends automatically to
imagine the intervention
of supernatural beings.
His initial theory is
simple because of his lack
of geological knowledge.
Who other than
giants or gods would
be able to fashion rocks
in such vast proportions?
The sea itself has
tried its best.
But throughout the
life of man, this cliff
has remained more
or less unchanged.
[WAVES CRASHING]
[SEABIRDS CRYING]
>> This granite outcrop on
Dartmoor in England is simply
the result of tens of
thousands of years of erosion.
But man, who is
always noted thus,
sees in it the requirement of
the gods to honor a stone idol.
>> Perhaps because
it was a challenge,
perhaps because it was
a discipline reserved
to the powers of
the other world,
men in their turn started
to work with stone.
In fact, they merely moved
them and erected them.
Raising long stones,
literally men
here in the Breton language.
This practice was common
throughout Western Europe.
But it is in the region
of Carnac in France
that we find the biggest
megalithic alignments.
>> These menhirs are often
associated with the rituals
practiced by druids.
But these stones were
erected and positioned
by men well before the
Celtic civilization.
This was about 6,000 years
ago in the Neolithic period,
a period when men began
to cultivate the Earth
and adopt a sedentary life.
The druids simply reused
them 2,000 years later.
>> Many different hypotheses
have been formulated to explain
why they are there.
They could be commemorative
stones or guide
marks in an early
attempt at astronomy.
The interpretation is
all the more difficult
because these megaliths
are positioned
in quite an unpredictable way.
Sometimes they are connected
to these enormous stone
tables that are called dolmens.
>> These dolmens gave up
their secret early in the 19th
century.
After a series of
excavations, it
was proved that they
were funeral monuments.
But the mystery of
menhirs remains intact.
It's generally agreed that
they had some holy meaning.
But some sites tend to
bring this into question.
>> Here at [NON-ENGLISH SPEAK],,
the north of France,
the menhirs stand in a circle.
Stone circles are quite common.
They're called cromlechs.
The interest of this one is
in the shape of the stones.
The upper part of
each menhir has
been shaped in the form
of a heel turned inwards
towards the center
of the circle.
>> Some researchers thought that
there was nothing sacred about
these stones and that they were
simply uprights for buildings.
Their notched shape
suggests that they
were used as an anchoring
point for guide ropes attached
to a mast, at the top of
which torches were left
to give a warning to the
surrounding population in case
of attack.
>> This explanation
is now discounted.
Today, we know that these
stones mark the position
of a funeral mound.
Here, they are called The Maids,
The Puppets, or The Little
Girls, for they look like human
shapes having a conversation.
There are still many
stories about them.
For the thing about stones is
that they encourage mystery.
>> Quite near here at L'Ecluse
stands the biggest menhir
in the region.
It's called the Devil's Stone.
At the top of the
stone can be seen
marks like the
scratches of a claw.
They are said to have
been left by a demon.
And for anyone who still
doubts that this stone has
evil powers, let them just look
at how the rock is flaking.
They are sure to see the profile
of a very disturbing character.
>> These stories often
originated with the church.
It was one way of discrediting
the stones, which were often
at the center of pagan cults.
Powers were often
attributed to them--
powers of protection, fertility,
fecundity, or healing.
Sometimes these were
the same magic powers
that were attributed to
special trees, a belief which
still persists here and there.
>> In Belgium at Herchies there
is an oak which is worshipped
in a very special way.
People come at night and hang
clothes, personal objects
on its trunk.
>> This comes from
an ancient belief,
possibly of druidic origin,
whereby in certain conditions
one can pass on one's pain
to another living being.
The best possible medium
is a very ancient tree,
one which is strong enough
not to be affected itself.
The transfer of
pain is carried out
when a nail which has
touched the sick part
is gradually hammered in.
This nail oak, which
fosters a pagan belief,
has been renamed
Saint Anthony's Oak.
>> Trees with magic powers
are now often adopted
by the Christian faith.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the 15th century
at [INAUDIBLE],,
100 kilometers from
Paris, the plague
stopped at this clump of elms.
Ever since, these trees
have been worshipped.
People hang clothes there,
rags, which serve as messages.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For one's requests
to be heard, people
come in and the
piece of cloth which
has touched the head,
the arm, or the chest
of the sick person.
The site here is
devoted to Saint Claude,
to whom a small chapel
has been dedicated.
>> The church has linked itself
all the more easily to these
practices because the tree
is not really deified.
It's just a medium
of communication
with superior powers.
Not far from there in
Normandy in the commune
of Allouville-Bellefosse, there
is a very old pedunculate oak.
The tree is more
than 1,000 years old.
Its missing branches
have been replaced
by a wooden turret,
a sort of bell tower
with a cross on the top, as
if it were a church, which
is almost the case.
The trunk, which is completely,
hollow has two levels,
with a chapel on each
level consecrated
to Our Lady of Peace.
>> This old oak has
become a sanctuary,
a sort of holy place which
inspires the respect that its
great age deserves.
On every continent,
1,000 year old trees
have been linked in some way or
another with beliefs or cults.
>> This is the case of the
Dragon Tree on the island
of Tenerife in the Canaries.
The indigenous
people, the Guanches,
who were living here before
the arrival of the Spanish,
worshipped these age-old trees
and performed sacred ceremonies
around them.
>> Supernatural properties and
magic powers have always been
attributed to this tree.
This is largely due to the
medicinal and cosmetic virtues
in the resin, which can be
extracted from its trunk.
It cures dysentery,
colds, or bleeding.
>> Similar therapeutic
properties made the ginkgo
the object of
veneration in the East.
At the end of the
first Millennium,
this relic tree
which had existed
since the days of the dinosaurs,
had almost disappeared
from the face of the Earth.
Only a few examples
remained in China.
[ORIENTAL MUSIC PLAYING]
Buddhist monks harvested the
leaves to make an infusion.
This beverage was apparently
very beneficial to both body
and soul.
>> Today, we know that these
very special leaves contain
rare substances which
increase the flow of blood
in the arteries and are
beneficial for the irrigation
of the brain.
The ginkgo was reintroduced by
the monks in Korea and Japan
in the 12th century.
Since then, it has been
venerated all over Asia.
In Japan, the ginkgo
is the sacred tree
found in Shinto temples.
>> The ginkgo has the unusual
property of being dioecious.
In other words, the tree has
both male and female specimens.
They are easily
recognized in autumn
because the males lose
their leaves earlier
and the fruit is still
on the female trees.
>> The deification of the ginkgo
in the East probably originates
because the two sexes can be
distinguished and conforms
to the cult of opposites,
to the dialectic,
which likes to oppose
the yin to the yang,
the north to the
south, good to bad.
>> Many trees are sacred,
but few are worshipped
for themselves.
They are venerated
as living beings,
silent and wise witnesses
to passing generations.
With its leaves touching
the heavens and its roots
in contact with the
underworld, the tree
is the very image of the link
between heaven and earth.
>> Never mind if the baobab
gives the opposite impression.
Everyone knows that it
was an angry god who
planted it upside down.
>> This old tree sits in
the middle of the village.
They used to say that it was
inhabited by maligned spirits.
Today, that belief
is disappearing.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
The population is turning
away from the cults of nature
in favor of
monotheistic religions.
Indeed, not far
away man does not
hesitate to open the earth,
to displease it, to rape it,
to run any risk just to
rip a few grams of gold
from its belly.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> In this primitive mining
concession in Burkina Faso,
men with no protection or
equipment descend into holes
that they've dug with their
hands looking for gold ore.
[METAL CLANKING]
In olden times, it was
thought that minerals formed
in the heart of the
Earth, rather like a fetus
develops in the womb.
And that this womb patiently
transformed the base metal
into gold, the symbol
of ultimate perfection.
>> It was the only metal
worthy of the gods.
It was made into chalices,
offering plates, ritual
statues.
Today, the yellow
metal drags in its wake
a pagan odor of sulfur.
The quest is difficult.
The fortune, illusory.
A few grains collected
at enormous risk,
but only finance a
few days existence.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> 10,000 kilometers away
from this concession,
gold has retained all its
sacred value in Thailand,
in the heart of Bangkok.
These gold leaves are being
presented as an offering
by the faithful who
have come to pray
at the Mausoleum of Erawan.
This building of
Paris stone, decorated
with the most
precious materials,
is dedicated to Brahma.
>> The Mausoleum was built
in 1956 to placate the gods.
Nearby, the Thais had started
to build a large hotel,
and bad luck befell the works.
The laborers walked
out, convinced
that the spirit of the
place had been offended.
To obtain forgiveness and
the spirit's goodwill,
the authorities decided
to build this monument.
[CYMBAL STRIKING]
>> The gesture must have been
appreciated by the supreme
powers, because straight away
work started again in the best
possible conditions.
It was deduced that the
mausoleum had great powers.
And today, people flock here
to bring offerings and pray
to Brahma.
[CYMBAL STRIKING]
>> Before concluding a
marriage, signing a contract,
or even buying a car, the
people of Thailand need to have
the ascent of the
spirits and the gods.
They make offerings to them.
They burn incense.
They offer lotus flowers,
garlands of jasmine.
They apply gold leaf.
They even set birds free.
Thus, they render
unto the gods the best
that the Earth has to offer.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]